
Uhuru's Fire
CREATIVITY, BEAUTY, ART

God made the sea, we make the ship; He made the wind, we make the sail; He made the calm, we make oars.
SWAHILI

Verily, beauty is power.
KANURI

If you suffer in order to be beautiful, don't blame anyone but yourself.
GANDA

The bird caught in the trap is the one to singsweetly.
OJI

Everybody is influenced by somebody or something. If there is an original who is the original? 
ERNESTINE ANDERSON

One should be able to return to the first sentence of a novel and find the resonances of the entire work.
GLORIA NAYLOR

Every society is really governed by hidden laws, by unspoken but profound assumptions on the part of the people, and ours is no exception. It is up to the American writer to find out what these laws and assumptions are.
JAMES BALDWIN

Blues is a basis of historical continuity for black people. It is a ritualized way of talking about ourselves and passing it on.
SHERLEY ANNE WILLIAMS

People wish to be poets more than they wish to write poetry and that's a mistake. One should wish to celebrate more than one wishes to be celebrated.
LUCILLE CLIFTON

The average man doesn't want to have to use his brain when he listens to music. Music should wash away the dust of his everyday life.
ART BLAKEY

A writer needs certain conditions in which to work and create art. She needs a piece of time; a peace of mind; a quiet place; and a private life. 
MARGARET WALKER

The beauty you left behind you, where will you find it tomorrow?
MOROCCO

The artistic innovator is perhaps our society's most valuable citizen. He or she does not so much change the world, as change how we view it. They are ambassadors of peace and advocates of understanding. They melt our differences into the common ground of the dance floor, the theater, the concert hall, and a million living rooms across the nation. That is why it is im- portant that we so diligently search for them.
OSSIE DAVIS

I have a great belief in the fact that whenever there is chaos, it creates wonderful thinking. I consider chaos a gift.
SEPTIMA POINSETTE CLARK

Art is the only thing you cannot punch a button for. You must do it the old-fashioned way. Stay up and really burn the midnight oil. There are no compromises.
LEONTYNE PRICE

Slowly, slowly one must stalk the monkey through the bush.
WOLOF

Softly, softly ketch monkey.
JAMAICA

Slowly, slowly will catch the monkey.
JABO

Art is not for the cultivated taste. It is to cultivate taste.
NIKKI GIOVANNI

We should not have a tin cup out for something as important as the arts in this country, the richest in the world. Creative artists are always begging, but always being used when it's time to show us at our best.
LEONTYNE PRICE

All I know about music is that not many people ever really hear it. And even then, on the rare occasions when something opens within, and the music enters, what we mainly hear, or hear corroborated, are personal, private, vanishing evocations. But the man who creates the music is hearing something else, is dealing with the roar rising from the void and imposing order on it as it hits the air. What is evoked in him, then is of another order, more terrible because it has no words, and triumphant, too, for that same reason. And his triumph, when he triumphs, is ours how awful the relationship must be between the musician and his instrument. He has to fill it, this instrument, with the breath of life, his own. He has to make it do what he wants it to do. And a piano is just a piano. It's made out of so much wood and wires and little hammers and big ones, and ivory. While there's only so much you can do with it, the only way to find this out is to try - to try and make it do everything.
JAMES BALDWIN

There is no beauty but in relationships. Nothing cut off by itself is beautiful. Never can things in destructive relationships be beautiful. All beau- ty is in the creative purpose of our relationships; all ugliness is in the destructive aims of the destroyer's arrangements.
AYI KWEI ARMAH

In crooked wood one recognizes the artist.
EWE

Beauty is in the oleander and the oleander is bitter.
MOROCCO

All along the lake the larks send their sweet scat through the air. It's April. New weather jazzes the leaves The late sun - a long note blown
across the water. Near shore a tadpole itching for legs.
TIM SEIBLES